Add jextract guide (#231)
openjdk/jextract: doc/GUIDE.md

# Jextract Guide

> The jextract tool parses header (.h) files of native libraries, and generates Java code,

Reviewer: Aren't .c files also viable for jextract?

Author: Technically I don't think the extension matters, but C header files typically have the `.h` extension.

> called 'bindings', which  use the Foreign Function and Memory API (FFM API) under the hood,

Reviewer: Double space after `which`.

> called 'bindings', which  use the Foreign Function and Memory API (FFM API) under the hood,

Reviewer 2: maybe add a link for FFM to the final JEP, so that readers who want to know more can do so?

> called 'bindings', which  use the Foreign Function and Memory API (FFM API) under the hood,

Author: Let's use italic, as that's the style we often use in the javadoc as well

that can be used by a client to access the native library.

Interacting with native C code through the FFM API works

> by loading a native library (e.g. a `.so`/`.dll`/`.dylib` file), which is essentially an

Reviewer: Comma after `e.g.`.

Author: You mean add a comma like `e.g., ...`?

archive of native functions and global variables. The user then has to look up the functions
they want to call using a `SymbolLookup`, and finally 'link' the functions by using the
`Linker::downcallHandle` method. Additionally, a client may need to create function pointer for
Java functions using `Linker::upcallStub`, access global variables through the addresses
returned by a lookup, and construct `MemoryLayout` instances for the structs they want to access.

> Jextract aims to automate many of these steps, so that a client can instead immediately start

Reviewer 2: If you want to avoid capitalization of `jextract` you can say `The jextract tool...`

> using a native library they are interested in.

Reviewer 2: I suggest using `the native library` (because it's the one they are interested in). Also consider using plural (e.g. the native libraries).

This guide shows how to run the jextract tool, and how to use the Java code that it generates.
The samples under [`samples`](samples) direcotry are also a good source of examples.

Note that at this time, jextract only supports C header files. If you have a library written
in another language, see the section on [other languages](#other-languages).

## Running Jextract

> A native library typically has an `include` directory which contains all the header files

Reviewer 2: Here I wonder if instead of using pseudo name for paths, we should use some more real-looking names, like `/usr/include` and `/usr/lib`, which are common in many NIX systems.

Author: I kind of wanted to hint at the fact that all library packages should have an `include` directory. The `/usr/include` directory can seem like a special NIX system path where libraries are installed, but that's more a quirk of the package manager which chooses to put the headers of all libraries in the same directory.

that define the interface of the library, with one 'main' header file. Let's say we have a
library called `mylib` stored at `/path/to/mylib` that has a directory `/path/to/mylib/include`

> with all the header files. And let's say that we have a shell open in the root directory

Reviewer 2: Maybe instead of `with all the header files` we could expand to `where the header files of that library are stored`

> of the Java project we're working on, which has an `src` source directory corresponding to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the Java project we're working on, which has a `src` source directory corresponding to
```

Author: It depends on how you read `src`. If you read S R C, then `an` is appropriate.

  of the project's source directory.
- `--target-package org.jextract.mylib` specifies the target package to which the generated
  classes and interfaces will belong. (note that jextract will automatically create the
  directories representing the package structure under the `src` directory specified
  through `--output`)
- `--library mylib` tells jextract that the generated bindings should load the library
  called `mylib`. (The section on [library loading](#library-loading) discusses how is done)

Besides these options, it is also possible to filter the output of jextract using one of the `--include-XXX` options
that jextract has. See the section on [filtering](#filtering) for a more detailed overview. See also the full
list of command line options [here](#command-line-option-reference).

Jextract assumes that the version of a native library that a project uses is relatively stable.
Therefore, jextract is intended to be run once, and then for the generated sources to be added to the project.
Jextract only needs to be run again when the native library, or jextract itself are updated. (This is also

> the workflow that jextract itself uses for talking to the libclang library).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the workflow that jextract itself follows: jextract depends on the libclang (link?) native library in order to parse C sources).
```

### Library Loading

When using the `--library <libspec>` option, the generated code internally uses [`SymbolLookup::libraryLookup`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/foreign/SymbolLookup.html#libraryLookup(java.nio.file.Path,java.lang.foreign.Arena))

> to load libraries specified by `<libspec>`, after potentially mapping the name of the library to a platform dependent name using [`System::mapLibraryName`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/System.html#mapLibraryName(java.lang.String)).

Reviewer 2: potentially? Are there cases where mapping a library name is a no-op?

Author: The `<libspec>` might be a path (using `:`), in which case we don't  do any mapping, right? I don't mind removing the `potentially` here though.

Reviewer 2: In that case, I think it would be clearer if we broke up the sentence. E.g. 

```
When using the --library <libspec> option, the generated code internally uses SymbolLookup::libraryLookup
to load libraries specified by `<libspec>`. If `<libspec>` denotes a library name, the name is then mapped to a platform dependent name using System::mapLibraryName.
```

This means for instance that on Linux, when specifying `--library mylib` the bindings will try to load `libmylib.so` using the OS-specific
library loading mechanism on Linux, which is [`dlopen`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/dlopen.3.html).
This way of loading libraries also relies on OS-specific search mechanisms to find the library file.

> On Linux the search path can be ammended using the `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` environment variable (see the documentation of `dlopen`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On Linux the search path can be amended using the `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` environment variable (see the documentation of `dlopen`).
```

separate files for certain declarations in the C header file. Namely, structs, unions,
function pointer types, and typedefs of struct or union types result in additional files
being generated. We will look at those in more detail in this section.

Most of the methods that jextract generates are `static`, and are designed to be imported
using `import static`. Typically, to access the code that jextract generates for a header
file called `mylib.h`, only the following two wildcard imports are needed:

```java
import static org.mypackage.mylib_h.*;
import org.mypackage.*;
```

Where `org.mypackage` is the package into which jextract put the generates source files
(using `--target-package`/`-t`).

The former import statement will import all the static functions and fields from the class
that jextract generates for the main header file of the library. This includes methods to
access functions, global variables, macros, enums, primitive typedefs, and layouts for
builtin C types.

The latter import statement imports all the other classes the jextract generates, which
includes: classes representing structs or unions, function types, and struct or union
typedefs.

### Builtin Type Layouts

> For every jextract run, regardless of the contents of the library header files, jextract

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure it's clear where these layouts definitions are introduced. I think the text should say that these are appended to the main header class.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps you can add a comment:
```
// mylib_h.java
```
as you do in later examples?

public static int bar() { ... } // 3
public static void bar(int varValue) { ... } // 3
```

`bar$layout` is the FFM memory layout of the global variable (1), and `bar$segment` is the
address of the global variable (2).

Besides that, jextract also generates a getter and a setter method to get and set the value
of the global variable (3). Once again, the parameter and return type of the getter and
setter depend on the carrier type of the layout of the global variable, which is itself
derived from the header files.

### Constants (Macros & Enums)

Both macros and enums are translated similarly. If we have a header file containing these
declarations:

```c
// mylib.h

#define MY_MACRO 42
enum MY_ENUM { A, B, C };
```

Jextract will generate a set of simple getter methods to access the constant values of the
macro and the enum constants:

```java
// mylib_h.java

public static int MY_MACRO() { ... }

public static int A() { ... }
public static int B() { ... }
public static int C() { ... }
```

Note that the enum constants are exposed as top-level methods, rather than being nested
inside a class called `MY_ENUM`, or through the use of a Java `enum`. This translation

> strategy mimics C's behavior of enum constants being accessible as a top-level declaration

Reviewer 2: There's another reason as well for not using enums - which is that, in C, you can use bitwise operations to denote enum sets - e.g. `RED | GREEN` (and other more crazy stuff), which would not be possible using Java enums. At its core, a C enum is just a glorified int.

as well.

Not all types of macros are supported though. Only macros that have a primitive numerical

> value, a string, or a pointer type are supported. Most notably, function-like macros are

Reviewer 2: Several people wonder what to do when dealing with a library that is heavy in its use of function-like macros. There's two strategies here - the first is to replicate the code in the function-like macro in Java, using FFM. The second is to create a small C library which turns the function-like macro into a proper function, so that it can be used from FFM. Not sure we want to add this detail here (or maybe in an appendix).

Author: I think something like that is good to add here. This guide is meant to be comprehensive. If we think some information is useful in the use of jextract, let's add it to the guide.

public class Point {
    public static final GroupLayout layout() { ... } // 3

    public static final OfInt x$layout() { ... } // 2
    public static final long x$offset() { ... } // 2

    public static int x(MemorySegment struct) { ... } // 1
    public static void x(MemorySegment struct, int fieldValue) { ... } // 1

    public static final OfInt y$layout() { ... } // 2
    public static final long y$offset() { ... } // 2

    public static int y(MemorySegment struct) { ... } // 1
    public static void y(MemorySegment struct, int fieldValue) { ... } // 1

    public static MemorySegment asSlice(MemorySegment array, long index) { ... } // 5

    public static long sizeof() { ... } // 3

    public static MemorySegment allocate(SegmentAllocator allocator) { ... } // 4
    public static MemorySegment allocateArray(long elementCount,
            SegmentAllocator allocator) { ... } // 4

    public static MemorySegment reinterpret(MemorySegment addr, Arena arena,
            Consumer<MemorySegment> cleanup) { ... } // 6
    public static MemorySegment reinterpret(MemorySegment addr, long elementCount,
            Arena arena, Consumer<MemorySegment> cleanup) { ... } // 6
}
```

> There's a getter and setter for each field of the struct (1), which takes a pointer to a struct

Reviewer 2: I see you didn't use bullet lists much, but I wonder if one would be helpful here instead of a single long para?

Author: I think it would be appropriate here

point, given a pointer:

```c
struct Point* new_point(void);
void delete_point(struct Point* ptr);
```

The pointer that is returned by the corresponding method that jextract generates
for this function does not have the correct bounds or lifetime associated with it.
These things are not possible to figure out automatically (for instance, a pointer
could point at a single `Point` struct, or an array of multiple `Point` structs).

The `reinterpret` method can be used to associate the correct bounds and lifetime:

```java
// Main.java

try (Arena arena = Arena.ofConfined()) {
    MemorySegment point = Point.reinterpret(new_point(), arena, mylib_h::delete_point);

    // ...
} // 'delete_point` called here
```

The `point` segment returned by `reinterpret` has exactly the size of one `Point` (for
arrays of struct, use the `reinterpret` overload that takes an element count as well). The
lifetime we associate with the segment is the lifetime denoted by `arena`, and when the
arena is closed, we want to call `delete_point`, which we can do by passing a method
reference to `delete_point` as a cleanup action when calling `reinterpret`.

### Function Pointers

> If jextract finds a function pointer type in the header files it parses, it will generate

Reviewer 2: More directly: `Jextract will generate a separate class for each function pointer type found in the header files it parses.`

    public static FunctionDescriptor descriptor() { ... }
    public static MemorySegment allocate(callback_t.Function fi, Arena arena) { ... }
    public static int invoke(MemorySegment funcPtr,int x, int y) { ... }
}
```

We again have a meta-data accessor for the function descriptor (`descriptor()`). There's
an `allocate` method that can be used to allocate a new instance of this function pointer,
who's implementation is implemented by the `fi` functional interface instance. And finally,
there's an `invoke` method which can be used to invoke an instance of `callback_t` that
we received from native code.

For instance, let's say we have a function that accepts an instance of the `callback_t`
function pointer type:

```c
// mylib.c

int call_me_back(callback_t callback) {
    return callback(1, 2);
}
```

We can call this function from Java as follows:

```java
// Main.java

try (Arena arena = Arena.ofConfined()) {
    MemorySegment cb = callback_t.allocate((a, b) -> a * b, arena);
    int result = call_me_back(cb);
    System.out.println(result); // prints: 2
} // 'cb' freed here
```

Here we use the lambda `(a, b) -> a * b` as the implementation of the `callback_t` instance

> we create using the call to `allocate`. This method returns an upcall stub like the ones

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we create using `allocate`. This method returns an upcall stub like the ones
```

> returned by the `java.lang.foreign.Linker::upcallStub` method. The `arena` argument denotes

Reviewer 2: Should there be a link here - like we did for symbol lookup?

the lifetime of the upcall stub, meaning that the upcall stub will be freed when the arena

> is closed (after which the callback instance should no longer be called).

Reviewer 2: "should not be called" seems to imply that if we call it something bad happens, but we can call it (e.g. it's up to our "goodwill"). "can no longer be called" seems more appropriate?

Reviewer 2: Of course, if the native code stashes the function pointer in a variable somewhere, it would be possible for it to call the func pointer again. But what I meant is that, in principle, FFM should give you an exception when trying to call `call_me_back` again after the arena has been closed, or calling `callback_t::invoke` on a closed segment.

Author: Yes, I had `can no longer be called` before, but switched to `should not be called` since it's technically more correct. I think `can not longer be called` makes more sense though, in hindsight. Thanks

Additionally, we can using the `callback_t::invoke` method invoke an instance of
`callback_t` that we get back from a call to a C function. Let's say we have a couple of
functions like this:

```c
// mylib.c

int mult(int x, int y) {
    return x * y;
}

callback_t get_callback(void) {
    return &mult;
}
```

The `get_callback` function returns an instance of `callback_t`, which is a function pointer
pointing to the native `mult` function. We can call `callback_t` instance that `get_callback()`
return in Java using the `invoke` method in the `callback_t` class that jextract generates
for us:

```java
// Main.java

MemorySegment cb = get_callback();
int result = callback_t.invoke(cb, 1, 2);
System.out.println(result); // prints: 2
```

Here the `callback_t` instance we want to invoke is passed as the first argument to
`invoke`, and then the `1` and `2` represent the arguments passed when calling the
`callback_t` instance.

> Jextract generates function pointer classes like the `callback_t` class for function

Reviewer 2: I know what you mean here - but I wonder if readers will get it w/o some kind of example.

Author: I'll add some examples as well.

pointers found in function parameter or return types, typedefs, or the types of variables
(such as struct fields or global variables).

### Variadic Functions

Jextract handles variadic functions differently from regular functions. Variadic functions

> in C more or less like a template, where the calling convention changes based on the number

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in C behave more or less like a template, where the calling convention changes based on the number
```

    public static MemorySegment cb(MemorySegment struct) { ... }
    public static void cb(MemorySegment struct, MemorySegment fieldValue) { ... }
    ...
}
```

In both cases, the name of the nested class is the name of the field of the struct.

Both fields also have the usual getter and setter, but note that the getter for the struct
field returns a _reference_ to the memory inside the `Foo` struct that corresponds to the
`bar` field. This means that writes to the returned memory segment will be visible in the
enclosing struct instance as well:

```java
// Main.java

try (Arena arena = Arena.ofConfined()) {
    MemorySegment foo = Foo.allocate(arena);
    MemorySegment bar = Foo.bar(foo); // reference to bar inside foo
    System.out.println(Foo.bar.baz(bar));  // prints: 0

    MemorySegment bar2 = Foo.bar.allocate(arena);
    Foo.bar.baz(bar2, 42);
    Foo.bar(foo, bar2);  // copies bar2 into foo
    System.out.println(Foo.bar.baz(bar));  // prints: 42
}
```

In the above snippet, note that the load of the `baz` field value on the last line will
'see' the update to the `bar` field of the `foo` instance on the line before.

## Filtering

> Some libraries are incredibly large (such as a platform SDK), and we might not be

Reviewer 2: Should we just say `windows.h` instead of the more vague "platform SDK" ?

interested in letting jextract generate code for the entire library. In cases like that,
we can use jextract's `--include-XXX` command line options to only generate classes for
the elements we specify.

> To allow for symbol filtering, `jextract` can generate a _dump_ of all the symbols

Reviewer 2: I noticed that in these sections, refrerences to `jextract` use a code block, whereas in the rest of the document they don't. I don't have a strong preference for one or the other, but we should make that consistent.

Author: I'll just switch to the plain jextract, as that's a little easier on the eyes. (This section was copied from the readme)

glEnable(2896)
glEnable(16384)
glEnable(2929)
glutDisplayFunc(MemorySegment{ address: 0x7fa6a002e820, byteSize: 0 })
glutIdleFunc(MemorySegment{ address: 0x7fa6a015a620, byteSize: 0 })
glutMainLoop()
glClear(16640)
glPushMatrix()
glRotatef(-20.0, 1.0, 1.0, 0.0)
glRotatef(0.0, 0.0, 1.0, 0.0)
glutSolidTeapot(0.5)
```

## Preprocessor Definitions

C header files are processed by a pre-processor by a compiler before they are inspected
further. It is possible for a header file to contain so-called 'compiler switches', which
can be used to conditionally generate code based on the value of a macro, for instance:

```c
#ifdef MY_MACRO
int x = 42;
#else
int x = 0;
#endif
```

The value of these macros also affects the behavior of jextract. Therefore, jextract
supports setting macro values on the command line using the `-D` or
`--define-macro <macro>=<value>` option. For instance, we can use `-D MY_MACRO` to set
the value of `MY_MACRO` in the above snippet to `1`, and trigger the first 'branch' of the
compiler switch, thereby defining `int x = 42`.

Please note that other header files included by jextract may also define macro values using

> the `#define` pre-processor directive. Therefore it is often important in which order

Reviewer 2: There seems to be issues with this sentence. Possible suggestion:

`It is therefore important to notice the order in which header files are processed by a compiler, as feeding header files to jextract in the wrong order may result in weird errors due to missing macro definitions`

| `--use-system-load-library`                                  | libraries specified using `-l` are loaded in the loader symbol lookup (using either `System::loadLibrary`, or `System::load`). Useful if the libraries must be loaded from one of the paths in `java.library.path`.| 
| `--output <path>`                                            | specify where to place generated files                       |
| `--dump-includes <String>`                                   | dump included symbols into specified file (see below)        |
| `--include-[function,constant,struct,union,typedef,var]<String>` | Include a symbol of the given name and kind in the generated bindings. When one of these options is specified, any symbol that is not matched by any specified filters is omitted from the generated bindings. |
| `--version`                                                  | print version information and exit      

### Additional clang options

> Users can also specify additional clang compiler options, by creating a file named

Reviewer 2: Maybe here we should start by saying that `jextract` uses clang to parse C files. And if additional options need to be passed to the clang instance used by jextract...

Author: I've added a leading sentence here in the latest version: `Jextract uses an embedded clang compiler (through libclang) to parse header files.`

`compile_flags.txt` in the current folder, as described
[here](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/JSONCompilationDatabase.html#alternatives).

## Other Languages

> As noted in the introduction, jextract currently only supports C header files, but many

Reviewer 2: Should we say something about many libraries (e.g. libclang) providing a C interop wrapper around their C++ impl?

Author: That's in the table below: `many C++ libraries have a C interface`

Reviewer 2: whoops - true. I thought that row talked about manually writing a C wrapper around a C++ API.

`Linker::downcallHandle` method. Additionally, a client may need to create function pointer for
Java functions using `Linker::upcallStub`, access global variables through the addresses
returned by a lookup, and construct `MemoryLayout` instances for the structs they want to access.
The jextract tool aims to automate many of these steps, so that a client can instead
immediately start using the native libraries they are interested in.

This guide shows how to run the jextract tool, and how to use the Java code that it generates.
The samples under [`samples`](samples) direcotry are also a good source of examples.

Note that at this time, jextract only supports C header files. If you have a library written
in another language, see the section on [other languages](#other-languages).

## Running Jextract

A native library typically has an `include` directory which contains all the header files
that define the interface of the library, with one _main_ header file. Let's say we have a
library called `mylib` stored at `/path/to/mylib` that has a directory `/path/to/mylib/include`
where the header files of that library are stored. And let's say that we have a shell open

> in the root directory of the Java project we're working on, which has an `src` source

Reviewer 2: I believe this was discussed here:
https://github.com/openjdk/jextract/pull/231#discussion_r1559141069

This means for instance that on Linux, when specifying `--library mylib` the bindings will
try to load `libmylib.so` using the OS-specific library loading mechanism on Linux, which
is [`dlopen`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/dlopen.3.html). This way of loading
libraries also relies on OS-specific search mechanisms to find the library file. On Linux
the search path can be amended using the `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` environment variable (see the
documentation of `dlopen`). On Mac the relevant environment variable is `DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH`,
and on Windows the variable is `PATH`. Though, for the latter the overall library search
mechanism is entirely different (described [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/dlls/dynamic-link-library-search-order)).
When using the HotSpot JVM, the `-Xlog:library` option can als be use to log where the JVM
is trying to load a library from, which can be useful to debug a failure to load a library.

The `<libspec>` argument of the `--library` option can either be a library name, such as,

> `mylib` which will, be mapped to a platform specific name using [`System::mapLibraryName`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/System.html#mapLibraryName(java.lang.String)), or a path to a library file (either relative or

Reviewer 2: I'd also drop the comma after `such as`

will be `mylib_h`. The class name can be set explicitly using the `--header-class-name`
option as well.

Besides the main header class that is generated, jextract also generates several
separate files for certain declarations in the C header file. Namely, structs, unions,
function pointer types, and typedefs of struct or union types result in additional files
being generated. We will look at those in more detail in this section.

Most of the methods that jextract generates are `static`, and are designed to be imported
using `import static`. Typically, to access the code that jextract generates for a header
file called `mylib.h`, only the following two wildcard imports are needed:

```java
import static org.mypackage.mylib_h.*;
import org.mypackage.*;
```

Where `org.mypackage` is the package into which jextract put the generates source files
(using `--target-package`/`-t`).

The former import statement will import all the static functions and fields from the class
that jextract generates for the main header file of the library. This includes methods to
access functions, global variables, macros, enums, primitive typedefs, and layouts for
builtin C types.

> The latter import statement imports all the other classes the jextract generates, which

Reviewer 2: or, `generated by jextract`

        .withTargetLayout(
                MemoryLayout.sequenceLayout(Long.MAX_VALUE, ValueLayout.JAVA_BYTE));
public static final ValueLayout.OfInt C_LONG = ValueLayout.JAVA_INT;
public static final ValueLayout.OfDouble C_LONG_DOUBLE = ValueLayout.JAVA_DOUBLE;
```

The above layout constants represent the layouts for the C builtin types: `bool`, `char,`
`short,` `int`, `long long`, `float`, `double` `long`, and `long double`. Additionally,
there is a `C_POINTER` layout which represents the layout for any C pointer type (such as
`T*`). Note that these layouts are platform dependent, depending on the platform that
jextract runs on. For instance, since these constants were generated on Windows, the
`long` type has the same layout as the Java `int` type, indicating a 32-bit value, and the
`long double` type has the same layout as the Java `double` type. (note that the latter is
only available on Windows).

### Functions

Let's say we have a main library header file `mylib.h` that contains the following
function declaration:

```c
// mylib.h

void foo(int x);
```

Jextract will generate the following set of methods for this function, in the main header
class it generates:

```java

> // mylib_h.java

Author: Don't think it's that important to mention. The comment is mostly there for consistency, as the text above already says that this is the class that jextract generates.

public static void foo(int x) { ... } // 1

public static MemorySegment foo$address() { ... } // 2
public static FunctionDescriptor foo$descriptor() { ... } // 3
public static MethodHandle foo$handle() { ... } // 4
```

First and foremost, there is a static wrapper method that is generated that can be used to
call the C function (1). Besides that, there are also several accessors that return
additional meta-data for the method: the function's address (2), the function descriptor
(3), and the method handle returned by the FFM linker (4), which is used to implement the
static wrapper method (1).

> The parameter types and return type of this method depend on the carrier types of the

Author: 'carrier type` is indeed an FFM concept. I've added a link to `FunctionDescriptor::toMethodType` which explains how these are derived.

layouts that make up the function descriptor of the function, which is itself derived
from the parsed header files.

### Global Variables

For a global variable declaration in a header file like this:

```c
// mylib.h

> int bar;

Author: For jextract it doesn't matter

            Arena arena, Consumer<MemorySegment> cleanup) { ... } // 6
}
```

There are:

1. a getter and setter for each field of the struct, which takes a pointer to a struct
  (a `MemorySegment`) to get/set the field from/to.
2. meta-data accessors for each field (`xxx$layout()` and `xxx$offset()`).
3. meta-data accessors `sizeof` and `layout`, which can be used to get the size and layout
  of the struct.
4. `allocate*` methods for allocating a single struct or arrays of structs.
5. an `asSlice` method which can be used to access elements of an array of structs.
6. two `reinterpret` methods which can be used to sanitize raw addresses
  returned by native code, or read from native memory.

The following example shows how to allocate a struct using the `allocate` method, and then
sets both the `x` and `y` field to `10` and `5` respectively:

```java
// Main.java

try (Arena arena = Arena.ofConfined()) {
    MemorySegment point = Point.allocate(arena);
    Point.x(point, 10);
    Point.y(point, 5);
    // ...
}
```

For working with arrays of structs, we can use the `allocateArray` method which accepts an

> additional element count, indicating the length of the array:

Reviewer 2: I find the way it's currently written fine (and better than the suggested one)

```

Jextract generates the following class in a `callback_t.java` file:

```java
// callback_t.java

public class callback_t {
    public interface Function {
        int apply(int x, int y);
    }

    public static FunctionDescriptor descriptor() { ... }
    public static MemorySegment allocate(callback_t.Function fi, Arena arena) { ... }
    public static int invoke(MemorySegment funcPtr,int x, int y) { ... }
}
```

We again have a meta-data accessor for the function descriptor (`descriptor()`). There's
an `allocate` method that can be used to allocate a new instance of this function pointer,
whose implementation is defined by the `fi` functional interface instance. And finally,
there's an `invoke` method which can be used to invoke an instance of `callback_t` that
we received from native code.

For instance, let's say we have a function that accepts an instance of the `callback_t`
function pointer type:

```c
// mylib.c

int call_me_back(callback_t callback) {
    return callback(1, 2);
}
```

We can call this function from Java as follows:

```java
// Main.java

try (Arena arena = Arena.ofConfined()) {
    MemorySegment cb = callback_t.allocate((a, b) -> a * b, arena);

>     int result = call_me_back(cb);

Author: It's defined in the C file in the snippet above.

>     int result = call_me_back(cb);

Reviewer: But we can't call the c function directly. Are there more java bindings that jextract generates?

>     int result = call_me_back(cb);

Author: Sorry, the example assumes that that the `call_me_back` function is also defined in the header file that jextract extracted, so a Java method would be generated for it.

>     int result = call_me_back(cb);

Reviewer: I would mentioned that. After all, this tool is meant to save Java developers from knowing the intricacies of the native language.

>     int result = call_me_back(cb);

Author: I put this:

```
We can call this function from Java as follows (assuming this function is also exported
through the header files passed to jextract)
```

```c
void func(void (*cb)(void)); // function parameter
void (*func(void))(void); // function return type
typedef void (*cb)(void); // typedef
void (*cb)(void); // global variable
struct Foo {
  void (*cb)(void); // struct field
};
```

### Variadic Functions

Jextract handles variadic functions differently from regular functions. Variadic functions
in C behave more or less like a template, where the calling convention changes based on the number
and types of arguments passed to the function. Because of this, the FFM linker needs to
know exactly which argument types are going to be passed to a variadic function when the
function is linked. This is described in greater detail in the [javadoc of the
`java.lang.foreign.Linker` class](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/foreign/Linker.html#variadic-funcs).

To make calling variadic functions easier, jextract introduces the concept of an _invoker_.
An invoker represents a particular _instantiation_ of a variadic function for a particular
set of variadic parameter types. When the header files contain a variadic function like this:

```c
// mylib.h

void foo_variadic(int x, ...);
```

> Jextract doesn't generates a regular method, but a _class_, which represents the invoker:

Reviewer: generates -> generate

    public void apply(int x, Object... x1) { ... }
}
```

This class has a `static` meta-data accessor for the function address, and a `makeInvoker`
factory method which can be used to create an instance on the invoker class. The `MemoryLayout...`
arguments passed to `makeInvoker` represent the memory layouts of the variadic parameters
that are to be passed to the function. The `makeInvoker` factory essentially instantiates
the variadic function (like you would a template) for a particular set of parameter types.

We can then use the instance methods `apply` or `handle` if we want to invoke the function,
as follows:

```java
// Main.java

foo_variadic invoker = foo_variadic.makeInvoker(C_INT, C_INT, C_INT);
invoker.apply(3, 1, 2, 3);
invoker.handle().invokeExact(3, 1, 2, 3);
```

Here we instantiate `foo_variadic` for 3 parameter types of the C type `int`. These parameter
types essentially replace the `...` ellipsis in the C function type.

We can call the instantiated invoker either by calling `apply`, which will box the arguments
into an `Object[]`, or through the method handle returned by `handle()` which avoids the
overhead of boxing.

### Typedefs

> As mentioned before: typedefs are either translated as a `static final` memory layout fields

Reviewer: before: -> before,

in the main header class that jextract generates, or as a separate class, depending on
whether the typedef is for a primitive type or a struct/union type respectively.

Take for example the following `typedef` declarations:

```c
// mylib.h

typedef int MyInt;

struct Point {
    int x;
    int y;
};
typedef struct Point MyPoint;
```

`MyInt` is a `typedef` of the primitive type `int`, so it is translated by jextract as a
`static final` layout field in the main header class:

```java
// mylib_h.java

public static final OfInt MyInt = mylib_h.C_INT;
```

> The `MyPoint` `typedef` on the other hand is a typedef for a struct, so it is translated

Reviewer: "`typedef` on the other hand" -> "`typedef`, on the other hand,"

as a separate class which extends the class that is generated for the `Point` struct:

```java
// MyPoint.java

public class MyPoint extends Point { }
```

Through static inheritance, all the methods in the `Point` class are available through the
`MyPoint` class as well.

### Nested Types

C allows variable declarations to have an inline anonymous type. Jextract handles in

> particular cases where a struct's field has an inline type specially. For instance, if we

Reviewer: "Jextract handles in particular cases where a struct's field has an inline type specially."

I don't understand this sentence. Does Jextract handle nested types only when a struct's field has an inline type?

Author: C doesn't allow other kinds of nested types, so yeah

Author: I'll just remove the 'Jextract handles in particular cases where a struct's field has an inline type specially.' part here

have a struct such as this:

```c
// mylib.h

struct Foo {
    struct {
        int baz;
    } bar; // field of Foo

    void (*cb)(void);
};
```

Jextract generates a _nested_ struct and function pointer class for the `bar` and `cb`

> fields, _inside of_ the class it generates for the `Foo` struct itself:

Reviewer: fields, -> fields

Some libraries are incredibly large (such as `Windows.h`), and we might not be
interested in letting jextract generate code for the entire library. In cases like that,
we can use jextract's `--include-XXX` command line options to only generate classes for
the elements we specify.

To allow for symbol filtering, jextract can generate a _dump_ of all the symbols
encountered in an header file; this dump can be manipulated, and then used as an argument
file (using the `@argfile` syntax also available in other JDK tools) to e.g. generate
bindings only for a _subset_ of symbols seen by jextract. For instance, if we run
jextract with as follows:

```sh
$ jextract --dump-includes includes.txt mylib.h
```

We obtain the following file (`includes.txt`):

```sh
#### Extracted from: /workspace/myproj/mylib.h

--include-struct Foo                  # header: /workspace/myproj/mylib.h
--include-struct Point                # header: /workspace/myproj/mylib.h
--include-typedef callback_t          # header: /workspace/myproj/mylib.h
--include-function call_me_back       # header: /workspace/myproj/mylib.h
...
```

The include options in this file can then be edited down to a set of symbols that is

> desired, for instance using other command line tools such as `grep` or `Select-String`,

Reviewer: instance -> instance,

```sh
$ jextract --dump-includes includes.txt mylib.h
$ grep Foo includes.txt > includes_filtered.txt
$ jextract @includes_filtered.txt mylib.h
```

Users should exercise caution when filtering symbols, as it is relatively easy to filter
out a declaration that is depended on by one or more declarations:

```c
// test.h
struct A {
   int x;
}
struct A aVar;
```

Here, we could run jextract and filter out `A`, like so:

```sh
$ jextract --include-var aVar test.h
```

However, doing so would lead to broken generated code, as the layout of the global variable
`aVar` depends on the layout of the excluded struct `A`.

In such cases, jextract will report the missing dependency and terminate without
generating any bindings:

```txt
ERROR: aVar depends on A which has been excluded
```

## Tracing

It is sometimes useful to inspect the parameters passed to a native call, especially when
diagnosing application bugs and/or crashes. The code generated by the jextract tool
supports _tracing_ of native calls, that is, parameters passed to native calls can be
printed on the standard output.

To enable the tracing support, just pass the `-Djextract.trace.downcalls=true` flag to the

> launcher used to start the application. Below we show an excerpt of the output when

Reviewer: I would mention that this is passed as a VM argument, not as a program argument.

glShadeModel(7425)
glLightfv(16384, 4611, MemorySegment{ address: 0x7fa6b03de8d0, byteSize: 16 })
glLightfv(16384, 4608, MemorySegment{ address: 0x7fa6b0634840, byteSize: 16 })
glLightfv(16384, 4609, MemorySegment{ address: 0x7fa6b0634840, byteSize: 16 })
glLightfv(16384, 4610, MemorySegment{ address: 0x7fa6b0634840, byteSize: 16 })
glMaterialfv(1028, 5633, MemorySegment{ address: 0x7fa6b0634860, byteSize: 4 })
glEnable(2896)
glEnable(16384)
glEnable(2929)
glutDisplayFunc(MemorySegment{ address: 0x7fa6a002e820, byteSize: 0 })
glutIdleFunc(MemorySegment{ address: 0x7fa6a015a620, byteSize: 0 })
glutMainLoop()
glClear(16640)
glPushMatrix()
glRotatef(-20.0, 1.0, 1.0, 0.0)
glRotatef(0.0, 0.0, 1.0, 0.0)
glutSolidTeapot(0.5)
```

## Preprocessor Definitions

C header files are processed by a pre-processor by a compiler before they are inspected
further. It is possible for a header file to contain so-called 'compiler switches', which
can be used to conditionally generate code based on the value of a macro, for instance:

```c
#ifdef MY_MACRO
int x = 42;
#else
int x = 0;
#endif
```

The value of these macros also affects the behavior of jextract. Therefore, jextract

> supports setting macro values on the command line using the `-D` or

Reviewer: Perhaps mentioning the distinctions between these macros and the ones described in the Constants section more specifically will be helpful?

Author: Hmm, not sure what to say. There are no real distinctions, but jextract only generates an accessor if a macro is defined in the header files, not if it is only set on the command line with `-D`. (I'll add that at least)

# Jextract Guide

The jextract tool parses header (.h) files of native libraries, and generates Java code,
called _bindings_, which use the [Foreign Function and Memory API](https://openjdk.org/jeps/442)
(FFM API) under the hood, that can be used by a client to access the native library.

Interacting with native C code through the FFM API works
by loading a native library (e.g., a `.so`/`.dll`/`.dylib` file), which is essentially an
archive of native functions and global variables. The user then has to look up the functions

> they want to call using a `SymbolLookup`, and finally _link_ the functions by using the

Reviewer 2: There's some classes and methods referenced here - should we use links? (don't have strong opinion)

Author: I think so. This is introductory, so someone may want to read up on the FFM API before diving deeper in  jextract

`Linker::downcallHandle` method. Additionally, a client may need to create function pointers for
Java functions using `Linker::upcallStub`, access global variables through the addresses
returned by a lookup, and construct `MemoryLayout` instances for the structs they want to access.
The jextract tool aims to automate many of these steps, so that a client can instead
immediately start using the native libraries they are interested in.

This guide shows how to run the jextract tool, and how to use the Java code that it generates.
The samples under the [`samples`](samples) direcotry are also a good source of examples.

> Note that at this time, jextract only supports C header files. If you have a library written

Reviewer 2: should we say "jextract (and FFM) only support..." ?

in the root directory of the Java project we're working on, which has an `src` source
directory corresponding to the root package. A typical way to run jextract would be like
this:

```sh
$ jextract \
  --include-dir /path/to/mylib/include \
  --output src \
  --target-package org.jextract.mylib \
  --library mylib \
  /path/to/mylib/include/mylib.h
```

In this command:

- `/path/to/mylib/include/mylib.h` is the main header file of the native library we want
  to generate bindings for.
- `--include-dir /path/to/mylib/include` specifies a header file search directory, which
   is used to find header files included through `#include` in the main header file.
- `--output src` specifies the root directory for the output. This matches the root package
  of the project's source directory.
- `--target-package org.jextract.mylib` specifies the target package to which the generated
  classes and interfaces will belong. (Note that jextract will automatically create the
  directories representing the package structure under the `src` directory specified
  through `--output`)
- `--library mylib` tells jextract that the generated bindings should load the library

>   called `mylib`. (The section on [library loading](#library-loading) discusses how is done)

Author: This should be have "this is"

Note that specifying the wrong header file to jextract may result in errors during parsing.
Please consult the documentation of the library in question about which header file
should be included. This is also the header files that should be passed to jextract. If
a library has multiple main header files, they can be passed to jextract by creating a new
header file which `#include`s these header files, and then this new header file can be
passed to jextract.

The library name specified to `--library` will be mapped to a platform specific library
file name, and should be findable through the OS's library search mechanism, typically by
specifying the library's containing directory on `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` (Linux),
`DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH` (Mac), or `PATH` (Windows). See the section on
[library loading](#library-loading) for more information.

> Besides these options, it is also possible to filter the output of jextract using one of the `--include-XXX` options

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Besides these options, it is also possible to filter the output of jextract using one of the `--include-XYZ` options
```

of the layouts that make up the function descriptor of the function, which is itself derived
from the parsed header files.

### Global Variables

For a global variable declaration in a header file like this:

```c
// mylib.h

int bar;
```

Jextract generates the following:

```java
// mylib_h.java

public static OfInt bar$layout() { ... } // 1
public static MemorySegment bar$segment() { ... } // 2

public static int bar() { ... } // 3
public static void bar(int varValue) { ... } // 3
```

`bar$layout` is the FFM memory layout of the global variable (1), and `bar$segment` is the
address of the global variable (2).

Besides that, jextract also generates a getter and a setter method to get and set the value
of the global variable (3). Once again, the parameter and return type of the getter and
setter depend on the carrier type of the layout of the global variable, which is itself
derived from the header files.

### Constants (Macros & Enums)

Both macros and enums are translated similarly. If we have a header file containing these
declarations:

```c
// mylib.h

#define MY_MACRO 42
enum MY_ENUM { A, B, C };
```

> Jextract will generate a set of simple getter methods to access the constant values of the

Reviewer 2: Nit: maybe omit the word `set` - e.g. just "generate simple getter methods...". Seeing "set" so close to "getter" might be confusing.

macro and the enum constants:

```java
// mylib_h.java

public static int MY_MACRO() { ... }

public static int A() { ... }
public static int B() { ... }
public static int C() { ... }
```

Note that the enum constants are exposed as top-level methods, rather than being nested
inside a class called `MY_ENUM`, or through the use of a Java `enum`. This translation
strategy mimics C's behavior of enum constants being accessible as a top-level declaration,
and also makes it easier to do bitwise operations like `A | B`, which are not possible
with Java `enum`s.

Not all types of macros are supported though. Only macros that have a primitive numerical
value, a string, or a pointer type are supported. Most notably, function-like macros are
not supported by jextract. For function-like macros, alternatives include re-writing the
code inside the macro in Java, using the FFM API, or writing a small C library which wraps
the function-like macro in a proper exported C function that can then be linked against
through the FFM API.

> Note that for macros, jextract only generates an accessor when it sees a macro definition,

Reviewer 2: Feels like here we need a link to the preprocessor section

like the one in the example, in the header files it parses. When a macro is defined
using `-D` on the command line, no accessor will be generated.

> ### Structs & Unions

Author: It's exactly the same for both (I'll mention that as well)

public class Point {
    public static final GroupLayout layout() { ... } // 3

    public static final OfInt x$layout() { ... } // 2
    public static final long x$offset() { ... } // 2

    public static int x(MemorySegment struct) { ... } // 1
    public static void x(MemorySegment struct, int fieldValue) { ... } // 1

    public static final OfInt y$layout() { ... } // 2
    public static final long y$offset() { ... } // 2

    public static int y(MemorySegment struct) { ... } // 1
    public static void y(MemorySegment struct, int fieldValue) { ... } // 1

    public static MemorySegment asSlice(MemorySegment array, long index) { ... } // 5

    public static long sizeof() { ... } // 3

    public static MemorySegment allocate(SegmentAllocator allocator) { ... } // 4
    public static MemorySegment allocateArray(long elementCount,
            SegmentAllocator allocator) { ... } // 4

    public static MemorySegment reinterpret(MemorySegment addr, Arena arena,
            Consumer<MemorySegment> cleanup) { ... } // 6
    public static MemorySegment reinterpret(MemorySegment addr, long elementCount,
            Arena arena, Consumer<MemorySegment> cleanup) { ... } // 6

> }

Author: static methods don't need to be `final`. I think that may be an artifact of some code sharing we do internally.

    MemorySegment point = Point.allocate(arena);
    Point.x(point, 10);
    Point.y(point, 5);
    // ...
}
```

For working with arrays of structs, we can use the `allocateArray` method which accepts an
additional element count, indicating the length of the array:

```java
// Main.java

try (Arena arena = Arena.ofConfined()) {
    int arrLen = 5;
    MemorySegment points = Point.allocateArray(arrLen, arena);

    for (int i = 0; i < arrLen; i++) {
        MemorySegment element = Point.asSlice(points, i);
        Point.x(element, 10 + i);
        Point.y(element, 5 + i);
    }

    // ...
}
```

In the above example, the `asSlice` method is used to _slice_ out a section of
the array, which corresponds to a single `Point` struct element. This method
can be used to access individual elements of the `points` array when given
an index.

Finally, the `reinterpret` method can be used to _sanitize_ a pointer that is
returned from native code. Let's say we have a C function that creates an instance
of a `Point`, and returns a pointer to it, as well as a function that deletes a
point, given a pointer:

```c
struct Point* new_point(void);
void delete_point(struct Point* ptr);
```

> The pointer that is returned by the corresponding method that jextract generates

Reviewer 2: Consider streamlining this by saying "The pointer that is returned by new_point does not have..."

for this function does not have the correct bounds or lifetime associated with it.

> These things are not possible to figure out automatically (for instance, a pointer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These things cannot be inferred (for instance, a pointer
```

    // ...
} // 'delete_point` called here
```

The `point` segment returned by `reinterpret` has exactly the size of one `Point` (for
arrays of struct, use the `reinterpret` overload that takes an element count as well). The
lifetime we associate with the segment is the lifetime denoted by `arena`, and when the
arena is closed, we want to call `delete_point`, which we can do by passing a method
reference to `delete_point` as a cleanup action when calling `reinterpret`.

### Function Pointers

Jextract generates a separate class for each function pointer type found in the header
files it parses. For instance, for a function pointer `typedef` like this:

```c
// mylib.h

typedef int (*callback_t)(int x, int y);
```

Jextract generates the following class in a `callback_t.java` file:

```java
// callback_t.java

public class callback_t {
    public interface Function {
        int apply(int x, int y);
    }

    public static FunctionDescriptor descriptor() { ... }
    public static MemorySegment allocate(callback_t.Function fi, Arena arena) { ... }
    public static int invoke(MemorySegment funcPtr,int x, int y) { ... }
}
```

> We again have a meta-data accessor for the function descriptor (`descriptor()`). There's

Reviewer 2: Maybe here using numbers in the code and a numbered list would be (a) more consistent and (b) more readable

    public static final long cb$offset() { ... }

    public static MemorySegment cb(MemorySegment struct) { ... }
    public static void cb(MemorySegment struct, MemorySegment fieldValue) { ... }
    ...
}
```

In both cases, the name of the nested class is the name of the field of the struct.

Both fields also have the usual getter and setter, but note that the getter for the struct
field returns a _reference_ to the memory inside the `Foo` struct that corresponds to the
`bar` field. This means that writes to the returned memory segment will be visible in the
enclosing struct instance as well:

```java
// Main.java

try (Arena arena = Arena.ofConfined()) {
    MemorySegment foo = Foo.allocate(arena);
    MemorySegment bar = Foo.bar(foo); // reference to bar inside foo
    System.out.println(Foo.bar.baz(bar));  // prints: 0

    MemorySegment bar2 = Foo.bar.allocate(arena);
    Foo.bar.baz(bar2, 42);
    Foo.bar(foo, bar2);  // copies bar2 into foo
    System.out.println(Foo.bar.baz(bar));  // prints: 42
}
```

In the above snippet, note that the load of the `baz` field value on the last line will
_see_ the update to the `bar` field of the `foo` instance on the line before.

> 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we could also add a section (maybe in a followup PR) on fields/globals with array types, as jextract generates extra metadata (e.g. dimensions) and the Java type used for these accesses is MemorySegment (with bulk copy support on `set`)

Author: Yes, good point. This was missed

Author: let's save this for a followup, and get this stake in the ground first :) (it will probably also be easier to review a small section)

### Unsupported Features

Finally, there are some features that jextract does not support, listed below:

- Certain C types bigger than 64 bits (e.g. `long double` on Linux).

> - Function-like macros (as mentioned in the [section on constants](#constants-macros--enums))

Reviewer 2: I wonder if here we got the reference backwards - e.g. perhaps the section on constants should just say that function-like macros are not supported and point here, then here we could say what workarounds could be used in more details?

Reviewer 2: Errno and endianness also come to mind in terms of unsupported stuff

- Bit fields. You will see a warning about bit fields being skipped, such as:
  
  ```txt
  WARNING: Skipping Foo.x (bitfields are not supported)
  ```

- Opaque types. When a struct or union type is declared but not defined, like:

  ```c
  struct Foo;
  ```

  Jextract is not able to generate the regular `Foo` class. You will see a warning about
  these structs being skipped, such as:

  ```txt
  WARNING: Skipping Foo (type Declared(Foo) is not supported)
  ```

## Advanced

### Preprocessor Definitions

> C header files are processed by a pre-processor by a compiler before they are inspected

Reviewer 2: I think you mean pre-processor, and remove "by a compiler" ?

which header files are processed by a compiler, as feeding header files to jextract in the
wrong order may result in weird errors due to missing macro definitions. A well-known
example of this are Windows SDK headers. Almost always, the main `Windows.h` header file
should be passed to jextract for things to work correctly. Please consult the
documentation of the library that you're trying to use to find out which header file should
be included/passed to jextract.

### Library Loading

When using the `--library <libspec>` option, the generated code internally uses [`SymbolLookup::libraryLookup`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/foreign/SymbolLookup.html#libraryLookup(java.nio.file.Path,java.lang.foreign.Arena))
to load libraries specified by `<libspec>`. If `<libspec>` denotes a library name, the
name is then mapped to a platform dependent name using [`System::mapLibraryName`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/System.html#mapLibraryName(java.lang.String)).
This means, for instance, that on Linux, when specifying `--library mylib`, the bindings will

> try to load `libmylib.so` using the OS-specific library loading mechanism on Linux, which

Author: No, `mapLibraryName` adds the `lib` prefix on Linux

the name of that class is derived from the name of the main header file that is passed to
jextract. For example, if the header file is named `mylib.h`, then the derived class name
will be `mylib_h`. The class name can be set explicitly using the `--header-class-name`
option as well.

Besides the main header class that is generated, jextract also generates several
separate files for certain declarations in the C header file. Namely, structs, unions,
function pointer types, and typedefs of struct or union types result in additional files
being generated. (All of these are discussed in more detail in the
[Using The Code Generated By Jextract section](#using-the-code-generated-by-jextract)).

Jextract assumes that the version of a native library that a project uses is relatively stable.
Therefore, jextract is intended to be run once, and then for the generated sources to be added to the project.
Jextract only needs to be run again when the native library, or jextract itself are updated.
(This is also the workflow that jextract itself follows: jextract depends on the
[libclang](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/LibClang.html) native library in order to parse C sources).

> ### Preprocessor Definitions

Reviewer 2: IMHO both this and the following section is not important enough to appear so early in the document. If we went straight to "Using The Code Generated By Jextract" we would not lose anything - then after that section, we can provide more details about various aspects/options.

Author: Not sure... I know what you mean, but knowing how to run the generated code seems fairly important. It seems that that is something someone might want to try out after the first example. Unfortunately, this requires understanding library loading, which is fairly complex.

Also, the comment about feeding jextract the right header file seems pretty important since user may run into errors when running jextract otherwise (we've seen many questions about that, e.g. when someone tries to extract some arbitrary Windows header instead of `Windows.h`).

But also, I realized that this guide may not just be used by first-time readers, but also as a reference by more experienced users, in which case it seems nice to have info about command line flags mostly in one place.

Reviewer 2: While it's true that knowing which header to extract is important, I think having a whole section on "preprocessor definitions" feels like having a very cornery section in a place where in reality you want something more general. E.g. extracting windows.h is tricky, because of order dependencies, but I'm not sure the user needs to be aware of -D here. Just mentioning that headers are complex beasts and can depend on each other in unpredictable ways (and refer to the doc of the library that needs to be extracted) should be good enough guidance at this point.

As for library loading I'm not sure... again, yes, we probably need to say something like "you need to ensure the library you want to call is loaded first" - but I'm not sure we need the full shebang of library loading options. In other places you added references to stuff that is further expanded upon in later sections - e.g. 

```
Besides these options, it is also possible to filter the output of jextract using one of the --include-XXX options that jextract has. See the section on [filtering](https://github.com/JornVernee/jextract/blob/Guide/doc/GUIDE.md#filtering) for a more detailed overview.
```

Seems like something similar is required here.

Author: Still not sure. The section on pre-processor definitions is already fairly small, and, in some rare cases, `-D` may be required for extraction to work as well. Do we really want to put ~half this section elsewhere? It seems this information is relevant to 'Running Jextract' as well.

For library loading, a user needs to know what happens to the string they pass to `--library`, which requires understanding the distinction between library names/paths, and the fact that the user needs to set `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`/`DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH`/`PATH`. Even for someone who's experienced with native library loading, that seems like important information?

I think in both cases, we would end up splitting just part of the information into a separate section. Even if not ideal, I think it's better to keep all the info together. So, if we can't get away with moving these sections out-of-line completely, which I don't think we can, I'm inclined to leave things as they are in this area.

Maybe we can improve the situation by have a very basic hello world example up front?

Reviewer 2: IMHO is not about moving "half sections", but about writing a section that is correct for the purpose in which it appears in the document. We seem to have two requirements for users getting started with jextract:
* explain that the header on which it is run matters (this can literally be one sentence)
* explain that libraries must be loaded (I think here we can get away by providing something that works in the 80% use cases, plus some comment on LD_LIBRARY_PATH, and refer everything else to a more specialized section. E.g. I don't think here we should be talking about different lookups, in which orders symbols are looked up etc.).

This way you can have a document that serves both "green" developers and more experienced one (the latter will want to keep going after the section illustrating how to use bindings). At least, IMHO.

Reviewer 2: I personally like the new changes a lot! I find the "running jextract" section very informative, providing all the major info w/o overstaying its welcome. Also it points to several other sections in the doc, so it acts a bit as a mental map, which is good.

I have some reservation about "unsupported features" being down in "Advanced" - should that be the last section in "Using jextract bindings" instead? (e.g. first we show what works, and then if the reader was expecting something else, we have a section for that too). Or, maybe pull it more "up front". Right now it seems kind of buried in other stuff, even thought it seems generally useful.

Author: Ok, I'll keep it like this then.

I'll move the unsupported feature to the end of the 'using' section.

header file, show the code that jextract generates for these declarations, and show
some examples of how to use the generated Java code.

> Most of the methods that jextract generates are `static`, and are designed to be imported

Reviewer 2: Uhm - I think the paras you moved fitted nicely in this introductory section

Author: I think they could go in either section? But, this way, we can discuss the `--header-class-name` option in the section about running, which I think makes more sense.

Reviewer 2: On a second look, it makes sense in this updated version.

First and foremost, there is a static wrapper method that is generated that can be used to
call the C function (1). Besides that, there are also several accessors that return

> additional meta-data for the method: the function's address, represented as a

Reviewer 2: Should we use a numbered list here too?

Author: I don't think it's possible to start a markdown list at `2`, but I will try

Author: Looks like this doesn't work unfortunately.

Author: No, wait, got it working after all.

First and foremost, there is a static wrapper method that is generated that can be used to
call the C function (1). Besides that, there are also several accessors that return
additional meta-data for the method:

> 

Reviewer 2: You could also add an item for (1) instead of having separate text above?

Author: Done

Reviewer 2: Now veering into nitpicks: but I note that we have an asymmetry between structs and functions. In functions we try to call out the function accessor (probably on the basis that this is the symbol the user is likely to be looking for). But for structs we just list all the members one after the other (even though the most likely is probably (1) - e.g. getter/setter). I think the document could be improved (optionally) by rectifying this one way or the other.

value, a string, or a pointer type are supported. Most notably, function-like macros are
not supported by jextract. For function-like macros, alternatives include re-writing the
code inside the macro in Java, using the FFM API, or writing a small C library which wraps
the function-like macro in a proper exported C function that can then be linked against
through the FFM API.

Note that for macros, jextract only generates an accessor when it sees a macro definition,

> like the one in the example, in the header files it parses. When a macro is only defined

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
like the one in the example, in the header files it parses. When a macro is defined
```

Author: `only` is relevant here. If a macro is defined using `#define` _and_ on the command line, jextract will generate an accessor.

Author: Ok, removed.

> using `-D` on the command line, not accessor will be generated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using `-D` on the command line, no accessor will be generated.
```

### Function Pointers

> Jextract will generate a separate class for each function pointer type found in the header

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Jextract generates a separate class for each function pointer type found in the header
```

Jextract generates function pointer classes like the `callback_t` class for function
pointers found in function parameter or return types, typedefs, or the types of variables
(such as struct fields or global variables):

> ```c

Reviewer 2: thanks!

`compile_flags.txt` in the current folder, as described
[here](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/JSONCompilationDatabase.html#alternatives).

## Unsupported Features

> There are several elements for which jextract can not generate bindings:

Reviewer 2: element seems a bit vague, maybe "C program elements" could be better, although in this cases I suppose most developers will think about the term "features". Consider just having a bullet list and skip the first statement (after all, the title says it all). Note also the list is provided here:
https://jdk.java.net/jextract/
(maybe we should drop it from there in the future, to avoid duplication?)

- Function-like macros (as mentioned in the [section on constants](#constants-macros--enums))
- Bit fields. You will see a warning about bit fields being skipped, such as:
  
  ```txt
  WARNING: Skipping Foo.x (bitfields are not supported)
  ```

- Opaque types. When a struct or union type is declared but not defined, like:

  ```c
  struct Foo;
  ```

  Jextract is not able to generate the regular `Foo` class. You will see a warning about
  these structs being skipped, such as:

  ```txt
  WARNING: Skipping Foo (type Declared(Foo) is not supported)
  ```

> 

Reviewer 2: Bitfields missing?

Author: Bitfields is there. I'll add an item for types > 64 bits

Reviewer 2: I see bitfields now, but we should say something for e.g. `long double` on Linux
